Although the field of machine translation has a
very long history, the number of really successful
systems is not very impressive. Most of the funds
invested into the development of various MT
systems have been wasted and have not
stimulated a development of techniques which
would allow to translate at least technical texts
from a certain limited domain. There were, of
course, exceptions, which demonstrated that
under certain conditions it is possible to develop
a system which will save money and efforts
invested into human translation. The main reason
why the field of MT has not met the expectations
of sci-fi literature, but also the expectations of
scientific community, is the complexity of the
task itself. A successful automatic translation
system requires an application of techniques from
several areas of computational linguistics
(morphology, syntax, semantics, discourse
analysis etc.) as a necessary, but not a sufficient
condition. The general opinion is that it is easier
to create an MT system for a pair of related
languages. In our contribution we would like to
demonstrate that this assumption holds only for
really very closely related languages.
The first attempt to verify the hypothesis that
related languages are easier to translate started in
mid 80s at Charles University in Prague. The
project was called RUSLAN and aimed at the
translation of documentation in the domain of
operating systems for mainframe computers. It
was developed in cooperation with the Research
Institute of Mathematical Machines in Prague. At
that time in former COMECON countries it was
obligatory to translate any kind of documentation
to such systems into Russian. The work on the
Czech-to-Russian MT system RUSLAN (cf. Oliva
(1989)) started in 1985. It was terminated in 1990
(with COMECON gone) for the lack of funding.
The system was rule-based, implemented in
Colmerauer's Q-systems. It contained a full-
fledged morphological and syntactic analysis of
Czech, a transfer and a syntactic and
morphological generation of Russian. There was
almost no transfer at the beginning of the project
due to the assumption that both languages are
similar to the extent that does not require any
transfer phase at all. This assumption turned to be
wrong and several phenomena were covered by
the transfer in the later stage of the project (for
example the translation of the Czech verb "b~"
[to be] into one of the three possible Russian
equivalents: empty form, the form "byt6" in future
tense and the verb "javljat6sja"; or the translation
of verbal negation).
At the time when the work was terminated in
1990, the system had a main translation
dictionary of about 8000 words, accompanied by
so called transducing dictionary covering another
2000 words. The transducing dictionary was
based on the original idea described in Kirschner
(1987). It aimed at the exploitation o f the fact
that technical terms are based (in a majority o f
European languages) on Greek or Latin stems,
adopted according to the particular derivational
rules o f the given languages. This fact allows for
the "translation" o f technical terms by means of a
direct transcription of productive endings and a
slight (regular) adjustment o f the spelling of the
stem. For example, the English words
localization and discrimination can be
transcribed into Czech as "lokalizace" and
"diskriminace" with a productive ending -ation
being transcribed to -ace. It was generally
assumed that for the pair Czech/Russian the
transducing dictionary would be able to profit
from a substantially greater number o f productive
rules. This hypothesis proved to be wrong, too
(see B6mov~, Kubofi (1990)). The set o f
productive endings for both pairs (English/Czech,
as developed for an earlier MT system from
English to Czech, and Czech/Russian) was very
similar.
The evaluation o f results o f RUSLAN showed
that roughly 40% o f input sentences were
translated correctly, about 40% with minor errors
correctable by a human post-editor and about
20% of the input required substantial editing or
re-translation. There were two main factors that
caused a deterioration of the translation. The first
factor was the incompleteness o f the main
dictionary of the system. Even though the system
contained a set of so-called fail-soft rules, whose
task was to handle such situations, an unknown
word typically caused a failure o f the module o f
syntactic analysis, because the dictionary entries
contained - besides the translation equivalents
and morphological information - very important
syntactic information.
The second factor was the module of syntactic
analysis o f Czech. There were several reasons of
parsing failures. Apart from the common inability
of most rule-based formal grammars to cover a
particular natural language to the finest detail o f
its syntax there were other problems. One o f them
was the existence of non-projective constructions,
which are quite common in Czech even in
relatively short sentences. Even though they
account only for 1.7°/'o of syntactic dependencies,
every third Czech sentence contains at least one,
and in a news corpus, we discovered as much as
15 non-projective dependencies; see also Haji6 et
al. (1998). An example o f a non-projective
construction is "Soubor se nepodafilo otev~it."
[lit.: File Refl. was_not._possible to_open. - It was
not possible to open the file]. The formalism used
for the implementation (Q-systems) was not meant
to handle non-projective constructions. Another
source of trouble was the use o f so-called
semantic features. These features were based on
lexical semantics o f individual words. Their main
task was to support a semantically plausible
analysis and to block the implausible ones. It
turned out that the question o f implausible
combinations o f semantic features is also more
complex than it was supposed to be. The practical
outcome o f the use o f semantic features was a
higher ratio of parsing failures - semantic features
often blocked a plausible analysis. For example,
human lexicographers assigned the verb 'to run' a
semantic feature stating that only a noun with
semantic features o f a human or other living being
may be assigned the role o f subject of this verb.
The input text was however full o f sentences with
'programs' or 'systems' running etc. It was o f
course very easy to correct the semantic feature in
the dictionary, but the problem was that there
were far too many corrections required.