Although the field of machine translation has a very long history, the number of really successful systems is not very impressive.
The main reason why the field of MT has not met the expectations of sci-fi literature, but also the expectations of scientific community, is the complexity of the task itself.
A successful automatic translation system requires an application of techniques from several areas of computational linguistics (morphology, syntax, semantics, discourse analysis etc.) as a necessary, but not a sufficient condition.
The general opinion is that it is easier to create an MT system for a pair of related languages.
In our contribution we would like to demonstrate that this assumption holds only for really very closely related languages.
The project was called RUSLAN and aimed at the translation of documentation in the domain of operating systems for mainframe computers.
It was developed in cooperation with the Research Institute of Mathematical Machines in Prague.
At that time in former COMECON countries it was obligatory to translate any kind of documentation to such systems into Russian.
The work on the Czech-to-Russian MT system RUSLAN (cf. Oliva (1989)) started in 1985. It was terminated in 1990 (with COMECON gone) for the lack of funding.
The system was rule-based, implemented in Colmerauer's Q-systems.
It contained a fullfledged morphological and syntactic analysis of Czech, a transfer and a syntactic and morphological generation of Russian.
At the time when the work was terminated in 1990, the system had a main translation dictionary of about 8000 words, accompanied by so called transducing dictionary covering another 2000 words.
This fact allows for the "translation" o f technical terms by means of a direct transcription of productive endings and a slight (regular) adjustment o f the spelling of the stem.
It was generally assumed that for the pair Czech/Russian the transducing dictionary would be able to profit from a substantially greater number o f productive rules.
This hypothesis proved to be wrong, too (see B6mov~, Kubofi (1990)). The set o f productive endings for both pairs (English/Czech, as developed for an earlier MT system from English to Czech, and Czech/Russian) was very similar.
There were two main factors that caused a deterioration of the translation.
The first factor was the incompleteness o f the main dictionary of the system.
There were several reasons of parsing failures.
One o f them was the existence of non-projective constructions, which are quite common in Czech even in relatively short sentences.
was_not._possible to_open.
- It was not possible to open the file].
Another source of trouble was the use o f so-called semantic features.
These features were based on lexical semantics o f individual words.
Their main task was to support a semantically plausible analysis and to block the implausible ones.
It turned out that the question o f implausible combinations o f semantic features is also more complex than it was supposed to be.
The practical outcome o f the use o f semantic features was a higher ratio of parsing failures - semantic features often blocked a plausible analysis.
For example, human lexicographers assigned the verb 'to run' a semantic feature stating that only a noun with semantic features o f a human or other living being may be assigned the role o f subject of this verb.
It was o f course very easy to correct the semantic feature in the dictionary, but the problem was that there were far too many corrections required.
